Hey there!
Are you an artist, author, creator or a cultural worker?
If you are, you probably heard about copyright before
but you might still not really understand it very well…
Perhaps we can help with that.
Here we’ll show you how copyright affects cultural and creative work
and how you can handle it.
So first, let's be clear about what we mean
by Cultural and Creative Work.
Studies show that if you are an artist or a cultural worker
you like to dare, try new things,
you have a risky, artistic spirit
and the creative act is essential to you.
You see your work as a positive activity that you enjoy,
rather than something you HAVE to do to earn money.
Creative work is not just about financial income
it involves other types of rewards, such as
the autonomy to manage your time
or the freedom to make your own choices.
You probably are highly educated
unfortunately this usually has little influence
on your creative career.
You most likely work part time
and may hold multiple jobs to complement
the low and uncertain income
from your artistic work.
And like you,
there are a lot of other creators
—maybe too many for the market—
so there’s a lot for audiences and clients
to choose from.
And as work supply increases
payments tend to fall.
Finally, to develop a strong creative career,
you need to meet the right people
who can help you gain a good reputation.
Those networks also influence
your artistic practice somehow,
so you usually need to be very flexible and adaptable.
So although cultural and creative work
might be seen as a positive kind of work,
it also results in a lot of uncertainty.
Only very few creators and cultural workers
manage to reach the spotlight and become
so-called superstars.
And, once they do,
their work becomes more of a response to market pressures
than the result of artistic inspiration.
But what’s copyright got to do with this?
Copyright is a set of laws
that protects different kinds of intellectual creation.
Since the 18th century, it keeps a balance
between private incentive for creation
and public access.
Copyright protects the authors by making sure
they get compensation for their artistic,
literary or scientific work
for a certain period of time,
after which the work falls into public domain.
But recently copyright extension and scope
have become stronger and more complex.
Also, the different territorial characteristics of copyright laws
make it difficult to negotiate between countries.
And this is why,
in the creative economy,
a set of laws originally designed to protect authors
has turned more into a sort of currency.
So... how does copyright affect the cultural sector?
Consider this graphic explanation:
Right in the middle,
there are the original authors, the core creators.
Around them:
the producers,
agents,
programmers
and distributors.
These intermediaries assist you in your creative work,
helping you make it possible
and improving the way you reach your audience,
without having to bother with tasks you often don’t like
or don’t know how to do.
Sometimes creators themselves accumulate these functions.
You might find an artist who is also a producer,
an actress that is also her own agent…
but hardly the creator becomes a distributor.
And when they are, that means they probably became
superstars somewhere along the way…
This means that, in general,
core creators exchange their copyrights
for those intermediary services.
Because of their low income
they usually have a weak bargaining power
thus ending up with the smallest (if any)
chunk of revenues generated by their own creations.
Recalling the excessive supply of creative workers,
we can see that there are far more creators,
producers, agents or even programmers
when compared to distributors.
However, it’s this thin layer of distributors
that has more power to enforce copyright and control revenues…
This means that, instead of protecting authors,
copyright has mostly been used by major businesses
to control cultural production
and who can have access to it.
So, are artists condemned to be either
under-recognized, poor workers
or rich, powerful superstars?
No.
Between the mainstream approach
of taking a defensive position towards copyright
and the opposite possibility of dedicating
all your work to public domain,
there are many options.
You can opt for a more or less loose strategy.
There are no secret formulas
and no guarantee that one strategy
is more efficient than the other.
You can always combine both
protective and open positions,
depending on the project and actors at stake.
What is important to understand is that
you can set the rules of your own game.
And this is where open licenses can help.
(Wait.) What are open licenses?
For those of you who don’t know,
open licenses are agreements
which allow artists to set permissions
for others to use their creative work.
Creative Commons are a set of open licenses that fill a gap
between copyright’s automatic “all rights reserved”
and public domain’s “no rights reserved”,
granting a certain autonomy for artists
to decide in what terms
they want their work to circulate.
Creative Commons offers free, ready to use options
to license your work and it is up to you
to decide which ones to use.
But… How does that  help my creative career?
As we have seen
recognition, networks, time and artistic freedom
are worthy and interchangeable values
for you to consider.
But if you also want your creative work
to be sustainable and have a positive impact
for you and those who you work with,
always protecting your copyright
is NOT the only way to go.
Here are some strategies to manage the value
of your work with open licenses
Distributing your work with an open license
can help you reach larger audiences within a low budget,
and even achieve possible professional opportunities.
By sharing some of your work for free,
you can attract clients for other services
or products you also develop.
You can generate revenues through other indirect ways,
such as advertising, partnerships or consultancy
People may have access to samples
or beta versions of your work
and help you improve it,
getting a discount for their contribution
in the final product.
And by creating a community around your service
you can make your work grow bigger and trustful
improving your reputation.
As you can see, there are lots of possibilities
you only need to be creative about the strategies you choose.
Creative Commons helps you promote this transparent mindset
of sharing and referencing the people and work you love!
(Now) Think of your own projects today.
Can you hold them in the long run?
Are they generating the value you expected
for everyone, including yourself?
Are they sustainable?
It is up to you to decide
what to do with your own copyright
how you want to manage it
and in what terms you want to share your work.
Strategies, rules, agreements and laws
are defined by and for people.
And the way you set your own terms
has an impact in the world.
So, now that you know a bit more about
how copyright influences your creative life…
what role do you want to play
in the cultural scene?